+++
title = 'Don’t Do Too Much'
date = 2024-08-06T00:10:22+08:00
draft = false
+++

### Preface

So after yesterday’s post, I realised that writing is kinda fun. And since I already did all the setup for a blog site, I decided that maybe I should just continue writing. However, I thought that I should add some constraints of time and length to this writing, so I don’t end up staying up all night smoking something up. Hopefully this practice helps me improve my coherence, for I noticed I have a tendency to repeat certain phrases, and that I feel sometimes my ideas do not come across with clarity or precision. Hence I have decided to write about one and only one lesson from each day, to limit my scope. So here is the continuation of me writing stuff until I don’t have enough time — maybe when working life hits.

### Thoughts

It is funny, that yesterday I wrote about how I had a sense of needing to fill my days with things to do to be productive, even when on break. And today I listened to a podcast that told me to do less to be more productive. How coincidental.

Now you may be wondering, how does doing less make you more productive? And the answer lies in overhead. There is always some overhead in doing things, which could be an inertia in starting, or a mental refresher for the subject in question. Because of this overhead, it is better to work on a few projects for extended periods of time, rather than multi-tasking between different projects. And part of being able to do this is just to not do too many things. It is helpful to schedule and organise time to see if you have space to fit certain things, and if there isn’t it is okay to not do it.

A helpful quote I took down is “activity does not necessarily alchemise into results”. Which is a call for me to spend time to go “do I really want to cultivate this idea or passion?” and “can I find time to schedule time to dedicate to this?” and rethink the prospect of filling up each available block of time for the sake of it.

> “Activity does not necessarily alchemise into results.”

I am so very tempted to talk about the many other things I learnt, but I wanna keep this concise, so I will talk about my experience today.

Today, I went to NUS to work on some research. Honestly, I did not have much planned for the day, besides doing this work. In fact, I had made up my mind to pretty much block out the entire day to dedicate to doing this. Funnily enough, this turned out to be the same thing I learnt from that podcast, to schedule time to intentionally do things that need to be done with minimal distractions.

Well this was something familiar to me, for I spent my last semester of university doing just this. But turns out some smart guy called Cal Newport has given a term to this, called “deep work”. Apparently he wrote a book about it, which I have not read. Although I probably did not do as deep a work as what the book describes — for I was listening to the soundtrack of *Les Misérables* in the background — I have come to a new found appreciation of this form of working.

Firstly, I found that I am actually productive, in the conventional sense of the word. I start the day having no idea on what to do, and I end the day looking back and realising I have done much. The focus of just doing one thing for a longer period of time nullifies the inertia of constantly having to start something.

And secondly, I found that I do enjoy doing it. Although it is easy to think I did not accomplish much because I only did one thing, the process of just working on one task can sometimes be therapeutic — but maybe only to me though. Even though doing this does not always come with dopamine spikes, maybe you don’t even get much done, but there is a certain other joy in being engrossed and involved with something.

I will end with a separate thought about why I keep going back to NUS. like do I love NUS that much? I don’t think I do, but I think the environment of being in NUS helps me to focus much more deeply on tasks I want to work on. For one, there is free air conditioning, easy access to food, and places to walk around to take a break. But also, a bit of uncomfortability, such as not being able to jump into bed to sleep as and when I want to. Setting the right environment can be the one thing that makes or breaks your focus.

This concludes my thoughts, sadly I do not have a very interesting title. I hope that I can continue this regularly, but if not then bopes I guess. Thanks for reading!