+++
title = 'The Pursuit of Flexibility'
date = 2024-08-07T00:07:48+08:00
draft = false
+++

When I started my funemployment posts last week, I had a perspective that I should be maximising each and every day of my break. But as the days went by I was doing a lot of things but not appreciating life. And now, merely a week later, I have a paradigm shift in my mindset: one can be productive without filling up your day with activity. Not that we should waste our time and laze around, but that maximising was no longer a priority. So here are my thoughts about flexibility.

### The treasure in flexibility

I think the one greatest thing about being unemployed — which also applies to people on school break — is lifestyle flexibility. I think flexibility is something young people — not leaving out myself — don’t appreciate enough, and older working people all aspire to regain. By lifestyle flexibility, I mean the ability to organise some part of your schedule — like weekly or monthly — to do what you want to do. The greatest revelation I had today is the hidden value of flexibility, a treasure waiting to be discovered.

### Flexibility is not idleness

I think it is easy to have an idealistic view of what flexibility is. We all see those digital nomads, influencers, and successful people with a 3-day work week and we dream that that is the life to live. But I don’t think flexibility means doing less, but instead it is a freedom of choosing what we want to do. If we think of our own personal schedules, maybe our lives are filled with clutter from various work commitments. We have fixed things we have to do on fixed dates. I think what flexibility looks like is not having no clutter, but having good clutter. Flexibility is not idleness, but an initiative to do what we choose to.

### Choose what is important

The greatest benefit to flexibility is choice, but how do we know what to choose? I think there is an intrinsic sense of value that you place in certain things, and my opinion is that one should choose what they value most. Perhaps that is choosing to spend time with your family rather than to study for three more hours. So what do we value most? A good handle I have learnt is asking yourself this question, “am I stressed by my schedule?” If the answer is yes, then maybe we need a shift in our perspective of productivity. Maybe we need to reconsider what values are important to us.

### Me talking about my day (and hopefully linking it back)

So today, I had nothing much planned for the day. I was just gonna practice some piano in the morning and then go climbing in the evening. I had my schedule free in the afternoon. So I had a three hour practice session in the morning, and ate my lunch directly after. While eating, I was contemplating what to do in the afternoon. Then I thought, hang on, I really enjoyed my time playing piano in the morning, what is wrong with just continuing it for the afternoon. And that is what I did, for another three hours, with a short break in between to take a walk and get some coffee.

Here I learnt the value in my day was not just in playing piano — which I do find quite fun — for it is easy for our excitement of things to fade, but there was value in choosing what I felt was valuable to do in the moment. That I think, is flexibility. It’s not even that I was equally excited about playing piano the whole way through, if not I wouldn’t have decided to take a break and go for a walk, but now the option of choosing to be able to take a break had value in itself.

I have no idea how I am to apply this to when I start a regular job. How will I organise my time when so much of one’s day is dictated by the commitments of work, to find flexibility elsewhere in the day? I have a hypothesis, that saying no to things help, or at least slowing down to saying yes. In the sense of not cluttering up one’s schedule before one has valued something, for there are always other alternatives to consider. I do hope I will continue to appreciate this flexibility while I still have it. Thanks for reading! 😁