+++
title = 'A Thought About Shyness'
date = 2024-08-08T00:07:50+08:00
draft = false
+++

As I continue writing these short articles, I’m noticing a structure for these posts is organically forming. I am tending towards writing about one life lesson and then maybe yapping a little bit about my day. Well, let’s just see how this develops.

Today’s topic is a small thought of the nature of shyness. I got this thought while listening to a podcast — which seems to be my recent basis for life lessons. So I consider myself a shy person, although I won’t say I have social anxiety. Ironically, I also consider myself to be a confident person. I know I have strengths in certain areas — and weaknesses in others — and I won’t deny my strengths. So how does this balance out?

**Three senses of shyness**

To better understand shyness, I had a think about what situations would perpetuate a perception of being shy. I came up with three senses of shyness, which seem to build in intensity but are also distinct. To sound cool, I thought of three words to represent these, that all start with ‘I’, namely ineptitude, inertia, and infirmity.

**Shyness as ineptitude**

Out of the three senses, this sense is the most tame. I describe it as a sense of not knowing what to do in a social situation. In other words, it is a sense of not having the ability or the right social tools to navigate a certain interaction. Examples include, a sense of lostness as to what to say next, or feeling inadequate in small talking, or not finding the words to comfort a friend.

I face this sense quite often, noticeably in group settings. Specifically, I find that I have trouble sensing the right time to start talking. Usually, there are faster talkers in a group, and they tend to be able to fill the gap first. Whereas for me, a more slow and methodical speaker, I feel like I’m missing the opportunities to speak. Often I end up silent throughout, maybe giving an occasional smile. Sometimes I forget to even pay attention to the conversation.

**Shyness as inertia**

Sometimes, we face situations where we just don’t feel like socialising. This is the sense I call inertia. It is a lack of motivation to wanting to start a social situation. I think this is quite a universally felt sense, especially with strangers — I think the bulk majority of us wouldn’t start talking to a stranger if we don’t have to.

What differentiates inertia from ineptitude is confidence in one’s social abilities, but you just a lack of desire. I think internally this is how I feel when I say I am confident. I tend to think I can do it, but I just don’t want to. Sometimes accompanying this sense is a nuanced hint of ignorance — another word that starts with ‘I’. This is where we are not in the mood for social interactions that we don’t even notice social opportunities that come our way.

**Shyness as infirmity**

The most debilitating sense is a sense of weakness. It is a sense that one is not good enough for social situations. This sense can be very immobilising — another ‘I’ word — and it can be disruptive for everyday life. I am not an expert but I would like to think social anxiety can be considered a severe case of infirmity.

I can’t recall a situation where I felt strong weakness. But honestly in my childhood I was probably afraid of talking to adults. One example I can think of is being too scared to tell a teacher that a schoolmate wronged me. That is the sense I’m getting at, that there are some situations that feel like one is unwarranted to be in.

Well, as this post is getting long, I shall end here. I will also spare you guys from my yapping about my day. As this topic feels unfinished, I will probably keep talking about it for the next few days. It is a topic that feels relevant, as everyone wants to appear more confident to others. I do enjoy writing about it to, as I get to inspect my life and glean some insights from it. Thanks for reading!