+++
title = 'A Thought About Confidence'
date = 2024-08-09T00:01:49+08:00
draft = false
+++

Thinking of writing a shorter one today, because I’m sleepy. This is a continuation of yesterday’s post, where I introduced a perspective of shyness as three different senses. Now I would like to bring to the table three thoughts about the confidence.

**Confidence is actionable**

Confidence is primarily reflected by outward appearances. It is an assessment of our character from our behaviour. This means confidence can be expressed as actions which we ourselves choose to do. In fact, research has shown (or so I’ve heard) that people cannot tell between ‘real’ and ‘fake’ confidence (I do not have citations). I think we do see this sometimes in our lives, where for example someone comes up and mentions that you were confident in a presentation.

This is great news. If you’re like me, you have probably seen an amazing speaker that delivered his speech with such confidence that makes you go wow. Maybe our inner self goes wishes we could be like him. The truth is we can. We can actually ‘fake it till we make it’. We have a choice of what action to do, even when we don’t feel like it. Do we let our inner self limit our choice of actions, and hence our confidence?

**Confidence builds credibility**

The funny thing about saying things with confidence, is how people tend to instinctively believe what you say, regardless of what you are actually saying. I mean if it were you, would you listen to a timid guy who stutters over every statement, or a bold guy that presents grand statements. I would listen to the latter. Some part of me gives more credibility to the man with more confident, as if they knew their stuff.

The implication of this, is that if you want to communicate something effectively, you need to communicate it confidently. Without confidence, no one will listen to you. In a primarily western educated, industrialised world (iykyk), it is easy to think that we are highly rational creatures that can view things objectively. I think we can do that, but we don’t most of the time. Hence it is easy to forget the value of confidence in our interactions and just stick to regurgitating information — for those who have sat in a boring university lecture, you probably understand my sentiments.

**Confidence can be practiced**

Since confidence is a choice of action, it can be practiced. But confidence is not a deficiency in skillset, but a deficiency in mindset. I say this because we are confident with the people familiar to us, like our family and close friends. We have the skillset for social interactions. What we need to focus on in our practice is upgrading our mindset.

There are many ways to practice being more confident. One way is to practice being more spontaneous. An exercise is completing sentences as fast as possible, disregarding whether it is sensible. This helps us to overcome the instinct to second guess our thoughts. Another way of building confidence is a sort of self-tricking. This can be thinking of yourself more confidently than you feel, or imagining how a famous person like Michelle Obama would act in the same situation. At the end of the day, confidence is built from experience, and experience is just doing, so we need to just start doing.

I’m sleepy so I am ending here. Thanks for reading!