+++
title = 'What is Joy?'
date = 2024-08-09T23:47:08+08:00
draft = false
+++

I’ve noticed recently that I have been writing ideas which I took from podcasts I had listen to through the day. And while there is so much new information to glean from podcasts, I am starting to feel a bit disingenuous that I am ‘stealing’ other people’s thought — the urge academic integrity is kicking in. So from now onwards I shall attempt to synthesis something from myself.

Today was a day with much activity, which meant little time for space and reflection. I think that is a good thing, as it limits the scope of what I can write about. Recently I have been thinking about what brings joy in my life. In particular, I have come across this idea — which I think is backed by some amount of research of which I don’t have — of two senses of satisfaction. To put it in overly simple terms, there is a more immediate dopamine-driven craving, something akin to hunger. And there is a deeper, more satisfying joy that comes from accomplishing uncomfortable things.

I think there is a tension between both. There are good things that give us that dopamine boost, such as social interactions and food. But there are many things that if we are not careful can lead to overuse, such as social media. I find it hard to get at a good balance of both. For I am excited to start new things and plan many activities in one day, in the vein of ‘maximising each day’ and ‘exploring life for its possibilities’. No doubt I think these are good things, but there is a sort of fleetingness of the joy that comes. In contrast, I like to spend unhurried time working deeper on things. These things are uncomfortable to do, but give a more lasting joy. But as a result it is easy to look back at the day and think, oh I barely did anything today.

Practically, this affects how I plan my time. Well now I’m unemployed and I have plenty of time to do things, but how will I progress this when I start work, and my free time gets limited to early mornings and evenings (and public holidays). How do I schedule my life to find joy then?

Perhaps the nature of this problem is, in computer science terms, “lazy” and “sequential”. In that I should only think about it when it happens, and I should build on it step by step. But anyways, still on a journey of finding joy through each day.

On a last note, I mentioned previously I have been limiting my instagram use to once a day. I am doing this to practice going against the dopamine instinct to find immediate comfort. I think it has found me some comfort to engage more deeply in reflections about each day. Hopefully this manifests into a long term habit.

A final apology for having less clarity in my writing today. I both had less time to think about things, and also am lazy to edit my post. So you guys are getting the raw output. Feel free to respond to me anyway you like (although if you insta DM me I may only respond the day after). Thanks for reading!