+++
title = 'Constraint Satisfaction'
date = 2024-08-10T23:25:57+08:00
draft = false
+++

When I reached home today, I felt drained. The best part, I don’t know why. It might be because I had a day filled with activity, or perhaps it was the social interactions I had, or it might had been that I had woken up early. Whatever the case, it was a strong feeling of being out of juice.

This brought to mind a recent string of thoughts I had about limits. More specifically our human limits of time and energy. This seemed interesting so I decided to concretise this idea a bit.

### Accepting our limits

One of the biggest things I have learnt within the recent 6 months, is accepting that I have limited time and limited energy for each day. This has helped me to prioritise what I find important in life, and value each waking moment more highly.

But it is much easier to accept the thought of it, without fully accepting it in practice. What I mean by this is forgetting to apply this mindset through every day.

In particular, there is a tension I still hold between two views. One, of visioning what I could become. Some part of me wants to be a highly efficient, productive human being. This is sort of an unconscious inner striving to be the best that I can be. Two, of realising my humanity comes with its limits, which is a sort of reality check for my goals.

The difficulty comes in balance. It is very easy to self-criticise. “Why can I not focus for 12 hours? How will I survive adulting? You mean I should get 8 hours of sleep?” In the process, missing out the fact that there is a reason why we are built with limits.

On the other hand, it does not feel right to be too idle too. There is a sort of meaninglessness when we go too far below the limit. There needs to be some drive in our life.

### Appreciating our limits

It is hard to fully appreciate our limits. In a world driven by capitalism, it feels so difficult to say that sometimes the best thing to do is nothing. We live in such a comparative society. We find someone spectacular — especially with the Internet but that is a different topic — and think, wow I wish I could be like that. Sometimes we do the opposite as well, thinking oh I could never be like that, and live a resigned fate.

I think both of these examples are two sides of the same coin, of not appreciating our limits. On one hand, it could lead to envy, but on the other, resignation. But deeply understanding limits allows us to see that **there is too much in life to strive for, but there is also too much in life to give up on**.

Honestly, I too am on this journey of discovering limits. The endpoint of this journey I like to call “constraint satisfaction” — a homage to my computer science heritage. I would like to describe this as a lasting joy, satisfaction, purpose, arising from a deep understanding and appreciation of limits. In other words, a satisfaction from understanding life’s constraints.

I would like to write more thoughts expounding this idea, which is rather novel in my mind. But my mind has limits, and it currently cannot think of anything else to say. Feel free to chat me up about this. Thanks for reading!
