+++
title = 'Nuggets of the Week'
date = 2024-08-12T00:17:41+08:00
draft = false
+++

It’s the end of the week again. Time for another post to recollect and reflect on the past week. I think I have absorbed and thought about many things. Much of it come in the form of nuggets of information. But there are just so many different nuggets, that it is hard to filter through and find what is valuable to remember.

I’m still working through the process of organising the information I consume, and this involve building structures which can take time. In the meantime, this post will just contain three nuggets, which are not necessarily the biggest truths, but they were the first ones that came to mind.

### Keeping habits is easy, until it isn’t

Recently over my stint of unemployment I decided to embark on some self-improvement to up my adulting game. One of the ways I did this was trying to cultivate new habits, such as daily reading, regular exercise, and now writing.

As time progresses, and the initial drive to excel starts to fade, I face the first hurdle. This is a sense that it is harder to tap on that initial burst of motivation to continue habits. Without a conceivable short term reward, it can be difficult to maintain motivation.

The strategy I have learnt is not to rely on motivation, but on structure. The point is, to structure your life in a way that habits are easier to do — much within a motivational threshold — that it feels trivial to do. One example, for me to build up a habit of reading daily, I just place a book right in front of my desk, in plain sight, right next to my computer. This prompts me to start reading when I want to get on my computer.

### Deepening life by removing distractions

Last week I talked about an idea of being more productive in life by reducing activity. And instead of chasing things to do, to focus on doing few things deeply. More broadly, this is applicable to life, because our lives can be fast paced and filled with distractions. Instead, it is good to find time to quiet down from all the hustle and bustle.

One way I have been applying this principle is minimising distractions from my phone. This — as you probably know — is very difficult. We all have learnt an instinctive behaviour to remove boredom in our lives by opening up our phones and scrolling. This would be okay, if not for the fact that scrolling on social media gives us fleeting fulfillment. I think many of us can relate to feeling wasteful of our time after a day of scrolling.

It is hard to see that we have a choice, especially in the moment. The choice comes in resisting that impulse to pick up the phone when we get that initial sense of discomfort of doing nothing. The problem sometimes comes when we pick up the phone while we are bored while doing something important, like school work.

I have found a few strategies to be helpful. One, simply is do not disturb mode. This is a habit I have kind of built from university, where when I’m doing deeper work, I just turn on do not disturb mode and leave my phone face down. If that is not enough for you, you can put it in another room. The idea is to make it difficult to get distracted.

Strategy two is finding alternatives. Sometimes it is not enough to just avoid something, but you need to find something else to do. For me, that has become reading and listening to podcasts. The choice of what I do depends on how much brain I am willing to expend, but the idea is there, to fill time with something more valuable.

Finally, I have heavily constrained my social media use. Social media is usually the time killer on my phone. In particular, when I use instagram I notice I pretty much only open it to view other people’s stories. At times, I will open instagram, see some stories, get bored, and close it, only to open it 30 seconds later. Instead, I set a mandate to only open instagram once a day, at night (which is probably not idea honestly), because I don’t need to be up to date with everything.

From a life perspective, being more intentional in being less distracted has helped me find deeper value in the things I do. But I do have some ambivalence, because this has made me much less motivated to reply texts, so on a communication front maybe that needs some work.

### Focus on sleep

Well this is more of an interesting point than a practical lesson. Recently I listened to a podcast about the circadian rhythm and the importance of sleep. Apart from getting my hunger for anything intellectual to be satisfied, there were really some practical truths that hit me.

For instance, it is easy to talk about sleep as a quantity. What I mean is a sense of measuring how much sleep we got — if we even got it. As a former university student, it is common to joke about needing more sleep all the time, but we seldom make provision to focus on sleeping more.

What I love about sleep is how dynamic it is. Our bodies are so different from each other, that we all have different patterns and duration of sleep. But we also have that biological resilience to adapt to different sleep schedules. But so much of society has reduced all that down to averages. “7 hours of uninterrupted rest” is a familiar one to guys here. And this has been the cause of so much stress and anxiety towards sleep. When we thing we are not doing well just because we are different from the average.

The greatest thing I have learnt, is that we can focus on sleep. By that I mean focus on practical routines to get better sleep. And not only can we build these routines, I believe we should. It struck me that we spend a third of our lives sleeping. That is literally a third of our biology. We think, oh we should spend some 20 hours to work on a certain skill, we need to improve to get better at life. Well, one way of getting better at life is getting better at sleep. But why have we not dedicated the same time and effort into sleeping better?

I don’t know everything about this topic, but it is interesting. Now also that I see so much relevance to our biology and functioning, I will probably look into it more.

I shall end my post here, because I am tired, and this got longer than expected. I am lazy to edit, because I want to sleep (haha), so I hope there aren’t too many typos.
