+++
title = 'Learn All You Can'
date = 2024-08-13T23:41:41+08:00
draft = false
+++

### Primer

Recently, it is starting to take much too long to think about what to write for each day. This is especially so because I only start thinking about it rather late at night. So I have decided that a better approach to doing this is to spend some time each week planning out what to write for the week.

Since the university semester has started, I thought it would be apt to give some lessons for the students out there. So this week I will be sharing one small nugget which I have learnt from my time when I was still in school.

### The Main Idea

So I start today with the first lesson, that is to “learn all you can”. I think this is quite a straightforward idea. As students, learning is only the most appropriate thing to do. Hence I encourage you to dedicate time and effort to learning. Especially so for university students, there are so many interesting classes to explore, so many things to do, and so many opportunities to build on.

And I think learning is not constrained to academics. Life is so much more than just academics, and I think school is a great time to actually start figuring out about life. I’m talking things like hobbies, interests, building friendships, organising time, and the list goes on. My encouragement for students is to really get involved with trying new things.

For me, I felt I learnt the most when I was on exchange in the US. I went completely alone, and I had to figure out life by myself. It was here that I learnt so much, from picking up cooking, to getting involved with climbing, to making new friends and hanging out with them. It was an experience I would not have traded away, and my only regret is I didn’t have the mindset to learn and explore more things.

Now you may be thinking, that is cool and all, but once school ramps up, there isn’t time to think about these things. I can totally relate, and that is why I think this mindset is good to build at the start. Learning is more than just studying. And when we do start getting stressed with workload, assignments and catching up, it is helpful to be able to zoom out and think, what is truly important in school. Is getting the A the thing that matters? Or is there something greater that we can learn?

Hope that this idea helps shape your view of school. May you seek out opportunities to grow and learn, and always have a hunger for knowledge. Thanks for reading!