+++
title = 'Organise Your Time'
date = 2024-08-15T00:26:01+08:00
draft = false
+++

Today we will be talking about organising time. I think this is probably one of the simplest things I have started, that has made a big difference in my life. I cannot stress the benefits of organising your time. It allows you relieve the mental load of storing date, time and activity information and relinquish it all to your calendar.

### Calendar setup

I usually set up my calendar for the week ahead. Here is what I like to do. I first block out time for recurring events that are important. For a student, these may be things like lectures and tutorials which you have to attend.

Next I like to schedule in important task. These may be things like exams, or study blocks, or events. If I have the flexibility to, I would also schedule them based on where I will be at a certain time, to minimise travelling to and fro. For some tasks — like studying — which I know I will do each week, I may move them to recurring events.

I then fill up the remainder of my calendar with other activities. This may be meals, sports, hanging out with friends, and so on.

This is how I organised my life as a student. I don’t think it is anything special, but compared to not doing it, it makes a big difference.

### Additional nuggets

I think one of the biggest benefits of setting a structure is that it motivates you to stay on task. Therefore, I do encourage being as detailed and precise when planning your day as possible. I do understand that living with a tight schedule might be stressful for some, so I do recommend planning in buffer time to relive that anxiety. Alternatively, block out time for rest and relaxation.

Something else that helped me stay focus for long tasks, is time tracking. I used a website called Toggl. It kind of acted as a motivation to continue, as you can see how long — in reality usually how short — it took for you to be distracted. It feels like a bit of a game trying to see how long you can work on a task for. I think it is kind of like pomodoro, but without the countdown it is easier to go on longer stints of focus. It is also quite rewarding to look back and see a nice 3 hour block of focused work that you have done.

Of course, tracking time allows you to look back and see how much time you have spent on something. So for example I can see that I spent 420 hours on my final year project over two semesters. And this can help you see how to better allocate time. For one of my classes where I spent a total of 80 hours of work. I only spent about 10 hours learning the lecture content. Which meant the other 70 hours were on assignments and revision. So now that I know assignments take more time, I can easily allocate more time for that.

The final nugget I have is to allocate time for specific tasks. It is important to be specific on what task you are doing at what time. Instead of just a generic “study period”, I like to have blocks such as “catch up on this lecture” or “work on this assignment”. I think this helps to give much more focus on what are the key tasks that need to be done.

Hopefully this has helped you. I think I am not the best calendar user, but this is how I scheduled my time as a student. Currently, I am also looking at better ways to schedule time, so if you are interested you can talk to me. If not, thanks for reading!
