+++
title = 'Acknowledge Our Limits'
date = 2024-08-15T23:18:53+08:00
draft = false
+++

Today I would like to talk a topic that I feel is very important. Acknowledging our limits of time and energy. In the pursuit of learning and enjoying life, we must remember that we are only human. We only have the physical capacity to do so much.

This is a lesson that I had to learn as a student. I think it is easy to put an unrealistic expectation on oneself, that one can take on the world by themselves. It is easy to forget about our limited motivation, limited physical capacity, and limited emotional resilience.

I think that taking these things into account can make one both more disciplined and more joyful in life.

### It is okay to take a break

I think the first thing is acknowledging that it is okay to take a break. It is okay to find other things that you really want to do, and do them. Life is not about torturing yourself by making yourself sit through dense lecture notes. Do something else for a change, and you might find more motivation when you come back to your lecture notes later.

I learnt this when I was studying for my finals. I had reached a point where I was extremely motivated to keep studying. I was spending like 10 to 12 hours in school just working on practice exercises each day. I was so motivated I was even finding alternate sources of practice from other universities online.

And it was at the peak of my motivation, that I learnt to do something else. It felt quite morally wrong, to go and pursue a hobby just a few days before your paper. But that is what I did. I spent a day going climbing and enjoying myself. And when I returned back to studying the next day, I was feeling more refreshed, more joyous, and more motivated to continue.

### Test your limits

In almost a conflicting manner, I think there is a lot of value in pushing oneself to the limit. I think this makes you realise that firstly, you have a higher limit than you think. And secondly, then you actually can get a sense of how much is too much.

Each person has a different limit in the various aspects in life. I don’t think one should look at another and think, man I wish I could be like that person. Instead, find out for yourself how much you can push yourself in a certain area. Instead of looking at others with envy, use other people to build an inventory of areas that you can push yourself in.

### Intervals of creativity and discipline

For me, I realised that I could categorise school work into two main categories. One, was work that had a heavy cognitive load, a lot of thinking was involved. I call this creative work. Then there was work that was more routine but tedious. This is the disciplined work.

Physically, it is too mentally taxing — for me — to continuously be doing creative work for the whole day. These were things like watching lectures, thinking of new solutions for my final year project, and reorganising learnt content. Somehow I had subconsciously structured my time where I had smaller blocks of time for this creative work.

But then there was the tedious work that needed to be done. This were things like assignments, report writing, coding. Basically things that took some cognitive load, but not too much. These were not about coming up with new ideas, but more of applying things already learnt. I had plenty more time scheduled for this, which gives the mind a break from all the creative work.

I realised a balance of intervals of creativity and discipline has been very helpful in relieving the mental load on the brain. In fact, much of my creative work, such as coming up with new ideas, or learning a concept better by reorganising it, happens when I take a walk away from a desk and a screen. And when I return to the desk, I have all those thought processes already firmed up, and that is where I can begin the disciplined work.

### Stopping criteria

This is quite a recent thought. I know I am a bit of a perfectionist when getting things done, especially things I value. I realised I had a tendency to keep trying to add on to something, even when there is nothing valuable to add. I think this is because of the lack of what I call a stopping criteria.

Well this was not really a problem in school, because a stopping criteria is always given. For assignments, the stopping criteria would be completing the assignment. For coding labs, the stopping criteria would be getting every output correct — a reason why I might spend upwards of 15 to 20 hours on a lab.

But for a lot of personal projects, there is not a stopping criteria. There is no threshold of what is good enough that I would be satisfied to stop a project. This results in me just slowly losing motivation, until I have an unfinished project left in the archive. I think what would be helpful for me is to set a realistic scope, and a stopping criteria for the things I do. I think this can help me know my limits of how much work to spend.

Quite a long read today, had quite a few thoughts and was not too tired. Hope this helps in some way. Feel free to discuss this with me. I would love to hear your take. Thanks for reading!
