+++
title = 'Smart Studying'
date = 2024-08-17T00:06:52+08:00
draft = false
+++

I would like to end of the week by giving some studying tips for students out there. After all, it is good to study smart not just hard. I want to preface firstly that my tips are not a one size fit all, and they are definitely catered to my style of learning, which I think is relatively fast paced. I think for my major as well (computer science), there is more emphasis on generalising to the big picture rather than zooming in on details, so much of what I learn is more conceptual and abstracted.

I think there are 3 main processes involved in studying, which I learnt recently from some neuroscience lecture. These are attention, consolidation and retrieval. This categorisation is post-hoc, but the actionable things were what I did as a student.

### Attention

I think many people like to take notes during lectures. I am one of them. I personally used to take typewritten notes on notion, before I got my remarkable tablet and could make annotations on lecture slides. For typewritten notes, I would be mostly typing out the entire lecture slide content, alongside any important information said, or useful insights I thought of. When I used my tablet, I would mostly be highlighting and writing small annotations.

Some people like using lecture notes as their actual notes. I am personally not of that philosophy. I believe the sole purpose of taking lecture notes is attention. It forces your brain to be actively working and processing information. It’s basically a tool for staying awake. This has actually gone me through the toughest of fatigues, like a post-lunch food coma.

Other than that, lecture notes are almost useless for me. They are usually too messy to sort out, and I would barely refer to them at all. That is why, I don’t think it really matters the medium of how you take lecture notes. Although a caveat for math classes is that typing equations is quite tough, even with expertise in latex.

Over time, I arrived on a better solution for me with regards to attention. That is playing the lecture recordings at 3x speed. This is definitely not for the faint of heart, so try it at your own risk.

### Consolidate

The biggest part of understanding something is reframing it in a way that makes sense to you. This I call consolidation. I definitely did not do this as regularly as I should, and hence ended up having to relearn many concepts almost from scratch. But this is one of the greatest life hacks for understanding something.

My biggest tool is mind maps. I think mind maps are very very powerful. But I always have a bit of frustration with mind maps. Most concepts are actually too complex for a simple mind map. One example I have is when learning natural language processing, where there were notions of language modelling as both a task, as well as a process that can be used to solve other tasks. So I really struggled with the categorisation of language models, which ranged from simple classifiers, to complex neural networks, to the craziness that are transformers — what ChatGPT is.

So what ended up happening is a lot of drawing and re-drawing of mind maps. Now this might be seen as wasted time, and it does take a lot of time and mental effort. But each time you get a better understanding of the connections between different ideas, and you get a fuller picture in your mind. So the real mind map is actually in the mind. It is the literal mental map of the subject. The mind maps you draw out are just a representation of the true mind map, and it is the process of building these mind maps that help you consolidate information.

### Retrieval

The final point on information retrieval. This is arguably the most important as exams are about retrieval. I have found 3 different techniques useful for 3 different styles of subject.

For content heavy subjects that test understanding, I like to use a question bank. I would generate questions about a certain topic and answer them from what I know in memory. I think this is probably a technique in active recall. The good thing is that now with AI tools, it is extremely easy to generate loads of questions about a certain topic, just perhaps you might need to filter out the occasion oddity.

For more memory intensive subjects, I like to go for memory walks. This is where I will just go for a long walk, maybe 20-40 minutes, and regurgitate everything out completely. The regurgitation does not to be in order, but preferably somewhat sequentially. I like walks because they help me to think a lot more clearly. So I will just pick a topic, and just talk out every single point I can remember. This is helpful once you have learnt your content, like after mind mapping.

For more application based subjects, like maths, I think the best way is practice. There is usually not much content to learn, but what is needed is exposure to different problems. I think this is the most cognitively passive of the three techniques, as it just involves sitting down and being focused, and doing practice questions. Once you have learnt the required mechanisms to solving certain questions, all that's needed is a little oiling of the machinery to become smoother.

Usually I use a mixture of all three methods, because most subjects require some part of all. Just a reminder that these are just the techniques I used, which may not be effective for each one of you.

If not thank you for reading! Hope this has been of help to students out there. Study smart!
