+++
title = 'Reflecting On My Public Speaking Experience'
date = 2024-08-19T07:48:51+08:00
draft = false
+++

Today I had the opportunity to give a talk in church. It was a great avenue for practicing my public speaking skills. Now, I am no public speaker, so I don’t get many opportunities to do this. So I really want to treasure each opportunity I get, to build up this skillset. Hence this post will be a reflection on what are some of the areas at which I think I can improve in.

### Silence is powerful

It’s common to hear that you should use silence as a tool in speaking. I tried doing that, but there is always that uncomfortable urge to fill the empty space with equally empty words. Another thing I noticed was that my pauses which felt like an eternity were not actually very long.

Gladly I noticed this halfway through, and I became conscious of using more silence in the later half of my speech. Surprisingly, it felt powerful. I felt like there was instantly more impact in what I was saying. The biggest hurdle is just getting through that mental urge to needing to speak. Silence also gave me so much time to think about what I was about to say, to focus on things like articulation and gestures.

### Eye contact is engagement

I think I am poor at maintaining eye contact. My eyes are on the audience, no doubt, but I shift too often from one space to another. I think this carries with it a sense of disconnection. Even though my eyes are on the audience, there is no intentionality in where I’m looking.

A helpful tip I heard before was to find people in the audience to look at. Then every few seconds, to shift from one person to another. This gives a sense of more intentional focus at different regions of the audience. Well, I definitely knew this tip, but I struggled to do it, because it was difficult to enter that headspace, and because there was a display screen at the back which my eyes had a big tendency to wander to.

### Filler words are unnecessary

I am bad at controlling filler words. I noticed that I like to use the words “right” and “so”. And while the latter is not too bad, the former brings about a sense of hesitancy. Quite frankly, I can cut out all the filler words, and the message would be the same.

Personally, this is a bit difficult to overcome, because in real conversations I often pause them with filler words to go into deeper thought. I think one way of overcoming this is slowing down my pace of speaking. This gives me a greater assurance of the things I want to say, and there is more headspace into intentionally saying what I need to.

This marks the end of my reflections. Public speaking truly is quite a good opportunity to hone communication skills and confidence. Thanks for reading!
