+++
title = "NDR: Revamped GEP"
date = 2024-08-19T23:38:34+08:00
draft = false
+++

Since I have no topic for this week, I decided that maybe I should write some posts on my opinions of the national day rally (NDR). Well because I am a lazy person, I did not actually watch the NDR proper, and am relying on second hand sources of information — online news — and the small snippets from youtube. Anyways these are just my opinions from a not very knowledgeable average unemployed adult.

The first topic is about the revamping of the Gifted Education Programme (GEP).

To give context, originally the GEP identifies students in primary three via a selection process of tests. Then, these students are posted to 9 primary school to participate in an enhanced learning curriculum.

The revamping would shift to incorporating programmes to identify and nurture high-ability learners within each school. This means students can remain in their own schools — as to whether they can still transfer is unknown — and they may join after-school enrichment modules.

### The push for inclusivity

I see the idea behind this initiative. The idea is to give greater access to a higher level of education for students that show higher potential. This is a push towards more inclusivity in student that can be part of this programme, while combating the elitist mentality towards certain schools.

### The hidden costs of change

While these seem good, I wonder if there are hidden costs involved. I think there are some more obvious costs. For instance, manpower might become an issue, where teachers have to be trained to be able to execute these programmes. Resources are going to be more scarcely divided, especially comparing to the more centralised approach originally.

There is also a fear of diluting the effectiveness of the programme. In essence, casting a bigger net would imply the threshold of entry might be lower. There is a fine balance that needs to be made between catering to a larger audience, but also maintaining the standard of education.

### Losing the joy of learning

The two positives stated with the revamp, are that students can remain in the same school and keep their friends, and students may join after-school enrichment modules.

I wonder whether these are positives. A great benefit of the GEP was its ability to allow students to enjoy learning. And part of the experience is being with like-minded individuals in a proximal environment. This helps students to hone their skills and sharpen each other.

Additionally, after-school enrichment may appear like a chore. There is bound to be inertia especially for children in primary school. These students are already not enjoying tuition classes, what more optional enrichment classes.

### How to approach this?

I think the best way to approach this is with cautious optimism. I definitely think the government have gotten many smart people to think about this in a much deeper manner than I have. So I want to give this the benefit of the doubt. But at the same time, I cannot think that some essence might have been lost with this new changes.

Which maybe points to deeper questions within society. Questions like why is there some sort of negativity or tension with building up the “elites”? If we are a knowledge-based economy, should we not be focusing on the best way of strengthening our comparative advantage?

I think there are two subtle cultural instincts at play. One is a subtle blurring of equality towards equity. We don’t want others to do well if we can’t achieve it ourselves. An “if I can’t get it, you can’t either” attitude. The second is a sense that perceived hard work should result in excellence. That in doing more, in studying harder, we can learn more. But I think that loses the joy of learning in the first place.

Now that I have written this I realised I may have been yapping a bit. I am now a bit unsure if I would hold the same opinions at a different time of day — when I am more awake. But alas I am too lazy to rewrite it so there it is. Feel free to comment on it.
