+++
title = 'The Free Will Illusion'
date = 2024-08-26T00:10:03+08:00
draft = false
+++

So I was originally planning to write about the national day rally, but I realised I was not motivated enough about the topic. Now, I am trying to resume the habit of writing again after five days, and I wanted to talk about an interesting idea that I read about. As you can see from the title, the topic is on free will.

### Do we have free will?

This discussion begins with a bit of a primer about free will. This is one of the big topics in religion and philosophy. So free will, from how I understand it, is the ability for a person to make a “free” decision. A decision is “free” by the notion of something called the principle of alternate possibilities (PAP), where a person can choose to do something otherwise.

For example, let’s say you choose to enter an ice cream store, and you want to get a chocolate ice cream. Your decision to get that chocolate ice cream is “free” if you had the ability to choose to get another flavour, say a vanilla ice cream. In my attempts to sound smart, I shall describe this as the availability of reachable choices.

So in general there are two strong contrasting views, one called (hard) determinism that free will does not exist and the current state of the world is determined entirely by the preceding state of the world. This includes our decisions, which are predetermined by our biology, mental processes and all those neuroscience stuff in the preceding state of the world. The other view is libertarianism, which is the view that there are **some** choices that we can make as a human that are genuinely free. This feels more in line with our subjective experience of the world.

To make it clearer, determinism says that if we ended up on the vanilla ice cream in the end, there was some causal chain of processes that caused us to change from chocolate, and this was determined from the start. Libertarianism would say that change in decision is precisely our free will acting out, in being able to choose alternate possibilities.

So now the question is, do we have free will? And my answer is, that I don’t know. And I don’t think it is possible to know. In my mind, the only way to really know, is to measure every bit of information in a current world state, and then to know how to construct a future world state, and then to compare it with the actual world state. That sounds tangible although it would be unscrupulously impossible.

There are probably many more theories about free will and determinism — including a rather interesting one called compatibilism — but I am lazy to do research and write all these out.

### Why does free will matter?

This short answer is that it kinda doesn’t. These kind of deep philosophical questions are not going to influence people’s behaviour that much, at least for a bulk majority of people. However, associating with this topic of free will may open a can of worms to moral responsibility. Since I don’t like worms, I will not go down that path.

I think a big part in trying to understand free will comes from a sense of our own experiences. On one hand, seeing the physical world, it is very easy to see the world progressing sequentially. As we get better at understanding the universe, science also gets better at explaining phenomena that happen. Meanwhile, our personal experiences very much appear to be free. We like the idea that we get to choose what we want to do.

This is the idea of the illusion of free will, what I have just described. The illusion of free will is the sense that we actually can make decisions freely, and that is how I would say we all experience our lives. Whether free will exists or not, doesn’t really matter, in that we can’t even find out the answer to that metaphysical question. However, believing that free will exists, can be a good thing, regardless of whether it is true or not.

Psychology research has shown [(Baumeister et al. 2009)](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19141628/), that mere belief in free will, may lead to more reflective thought about actions, which may lead to moral behaviour — assuming a rudimentary societal standard of morality. This could imply something, that it may be better to believe that free will exists, because that might make you a more moral person.

It is easy to continue the topic with metaphysical ramblings such as considering why free will is even something worth philosophising about. Instead, I think this is a good place to conclude. I provide a happy result to this discussion of free will. That belief in free will, can lead you to do more good things.

So does free will exist?

Yes.

