---
title: "Books for Sep 24"
date: 2024-09-30T23:23:52+08:00
draft: false
---

Recently, I have been trying to grow my mind more by consuming books. To be more precise, I have been listening to audiobooks, which some might argue is not exactly reading. For me, I realised that reading is quite cognitively intense for me. I have a tendency to feel lethargic after bouts of reading, and I tend to spend the focus of my attention on the literal reading of the words that I tend to lose the big picture of what I am reading.

So trying out audiobooks for the first time, I found it very enjoyable to listen to. Not only could I multitask, for instance listening to an audiobook while commuting around, but I found I could consume information much faster, by listening at faster playback speeds. The downside is that it is hard to reference back to other portions of a book, which I find I tend to do more for non-fiction books.

Hence, I have decided to compile a list of books that I have “read” in September. I think this is a good opportunity to start writing. I intend this to be a short chill section with some of my own thoughts.

### *Jaws* by Peter Benchley

I honestly think I am more of a non-fiction reader. But I really needed a no-brain book to listen to and this one was free on audible. Honestly, I quite enjoyed the book, and I think it opened my eyes to the world of fiction. This book centers around the attacks of a monstrous great white shark, and all the surrounding circumstances. I must say the descriptions of the shark are probably far from scientific, and it does sometimes feel more like an unstoppable beast more akin to a dinosaur.

One thing I really liked about the book is this idea of an “intelligence” in animalistic behaviour. What I mean by this is that the shark is really depicted as a mindless killing machine. It just senses prey and goes and hunts, destroying everything in its path, including attacking boats. Meanwhile the intelligent human beings are coming up with all sorts of strategies to try to combat the shark. And most of the time their plans are foiled. It is almost like this animalistic killing instinct is “outsmarting” the humans in some way. I think this led to an intensity with the conflict with the shark.

I did enjoy the minor side plots of the story. The book is written from the perspective of a working-class policeman, and I think the author effectively used that to develop the side ideas. For instance, the weight of moral responsibility, when a decision to not close the beaches led to a kid dying. Another one was the pressure of political forces on the police, which is basically corruption. And finally there was a tension of social-economic classes when the policeman’s wife had an affair with a rich young guy.

### *The 12 Week Year* by Brian P. Moran and Michael Lennington

Just my jam, a hardcore productivity book for all those aspiring productivity geeks — which I unashamedly admit I am starting to become more of recently. Honestly, the main reason why I listened to this book is because it was free on audible.

The biggest takeaway I have from this book, is that we can get things done very quickly. However, most of the time we don’t. Until deadlines come, and then we get a burst of energy and magically complete all the work we need to do on time. The book basically suggests this idea that if we can harness that level of “last-minute energy” throughout the entire year, how much more productive can we be?

Personally I like this idea because of its simplicity. I think it is not hard for us to imagine what we can do if we had that energy each day. I can think of tons of instances where I accomplished more than I thought I could in a short period with time pressure. For instance, coding a video game from scratch for a 48 hour game jam, writing 10k words for my final year report in two days, even something like walking 24km around London by foot to clear all the major tourist destinations in one day. Hence I do keep this thought at the back of my mind nowadays when I approach life.

The rest of the book details the strategies behind achieving this. The big idea, which is where the book got its title, is to reframe a year as 12 weeks, so that the end does not seem so far away. The other content are more typical productivity things. These are things like setting goals, coming up with actionable steps to achieve the goals, coming up with good metrics to measure performance, taking ownership of mistakes, etc. I do think they do have some good strategies, in particular I like weekly reviews, creating tangible actionable steps and time blocking.

### *Red Rising* by Pierce Brown

A rather long but interesting book. This is a sci-fi fantasy dystopian novel kind of like the hunger games. Personally, I feel like I am too old for sci-fi fantasy and dystopian books because they seem to play a lot to a younger self’s joy of being immersed in an alternate universe. But I was really blown away by the world building in this novel. The world is so immersive and intricately developed I could not help myself listening to this for hours on end. I even listened to the book at 1.5x speed, which for reference I usually listen at 2.0-2.5x speed. That was how engrossed I was. But in all fairness, the novel does start a little bit slow, but there are hours of content to enjoy.

As do most other dystopian novels, this book makes you think about society. The society in this book is quite unique. On the surface it looks like a textbook dystopian some-important-people-rule-others-unfairly system, but actually it is quite nuanced. The society is fundamentally a caste-based system, where there is a ruling caste of elites, called “golds”. The lowest caste are the “reds”, which is where the protagonist happens to come from. There are many other intermediate castes but I don’t remember all the colours. Of course there is the usual socio-economic stratification, indoctrination, and all the usual dystopian stuff. I must say this point is portrayed well, because the protagonist was really gaslit into thinking his worldview is all there is. And because the reader reads from that perspective, the reader is also partially gaslit despite having the dramatic irony that they are reading a dystopian novel (and have probably read/watched hunger games in the past).

What I enjoyed about this book was how the golds were portrayed. Of course they reject democracy and all that, but the golds could justify their right to rule with the fact that they were biologically superior in all (reasonable) metrics to the other colours. They were supposedly more physically capable, more intelligent, better at leading, more good-looking etc. Well the means they got there were through eugenics which is another topic, but this idea fascinated me. The idea is this, can a group of people claim superiority in a society that operates on certain metrics (of which their origin can be questioned), if they are measurably superior in every way? I digress as I would like to express “measurably superior” as a Pareto optimal solution to this multi-objective optimisation with the metrics as the objectives. But reasoning this from a philosophical perspective, it does seem to be reasonable under the lens of utilitarianism. Society is likely to be better off, based on the assumption that the metrics are sufficiently good, and that the golds act rationally to organise and develop the society.

Well the problem with this is that the assumptions are quite tall. But even if they aren’t, some people are not going to be happy. People are gonna want freedom and equality and rights and expression. And also, people are not happy with knowing that they may be living a poor life because they were born into the wrong family. At least instinctively I feel this may be the response. But now I question it, because this response was very much influenced by the fact that I am brought up in a democratic and meritocratic society where I have a pretty reasonable non-restrictive amount of individual freedom, and I am thought that we can break out of the “unfairness” of being born poor through pure merit and hard work. I wonder if freedom is so heavily sought after and natural that it is instinctive for an individual not brought up in a freedom-based society to want to pursue it. After all, it did feel the protagonist also had an experience of relative freedom in his low caste society because they didn’t know better.

I think building up on this notion is an idea of equal suffering. This is poking back at the original idea of that ruling caste. The idea is this, should the elites be allowed to suffer “less” as compared to the working class, because of their status as elite? The idea that the book expanded on was this, what if the elites experienced “more suffering” than the working class, then would they be more suitable for leadership? In this case now the elites would have had even more ethos to their rule, because of their suffering.

The book had a very notable quote, which I went onto the internet to find. "The great rise because of Savagery. They rule in Ascendance. They fall because of their own Decadence." Basically the idea is that this society is trying to combat “decadence” by getting their elites to go through some suffering and basically not grow complacent. So there is this unique tension here, where on one side the golds are the elites and they know they are the best, but on the other hand they have to go through a lot of suffering to humble them. Does this make them more appropriate leaders? I don't know.

Well of course the society in the book is not perfect and there is the typical corruption and nepotism and stuff like that. And now to stop rambling on about stuff I will end here.

Well thank you for reading if you made it through! Those were the books I completed in September. Also, I would like some recommendations for books to read, so if you have any please send me!